Okay, so, um, hello and welcome in
and thank you for making the time to come into Parliament.
Um, would be great if, well each group
of you will have 15 minutes to present.
I do welcome that you leave some time for questions
and answers and members will be very keen to ask
for some specific examples as well.
Uh, I would recommend that you introduce yourself
so we can put a name, um, to your face
and it will just help with the dialogue. Welcome.
Thank you Kiara. Um, I'm Dr. Alexandra Brand Wheeler.
I'm Chief Executive of Master Electricians.
Um, and I have with me today my, uh, board chair RI Ash.
I'm Warren Willett, I'm the president
of New Zealand Specs, electrical Inspectors Association,
and I have with me my educator,
David Ty here would also have Mike Speaker as well.
And Mark Harris, Uh, sorry. He is on there.
Cool. Okay. Thank you. Okay.
You're welcome to make, uh, introductory remarks.
Thank you. So I'll, I'll lead, uh, with this statement
and then I'll hand over to the electrical
inspectors to add their bit.
So the Gazette Notice 2025
SL 4 1 9 1, which I'll just refer to
as the GC notice going forward, expands
and restructures the licensing into 41 classes
of new endorsed high risk work,
all requiring separate licenses.
We fully support regulating high risk work competency,
but this notice has produced an unworkable licensing regime
with extreme adverse consequences.
While the current economic conditions have muted the
immediate impact of our concerns.
The expected economic recovery combined
with potential immigration adjustments over the next 18
months, we'll rapidly intensify workforce demands,
underscoring the burning need to be prepared for
what is coming as pressure accelerates.
Firstly, the notice resets licensing for some high risk
and emerging areas, hazardous areas,
medical patient treatment areas,
and mains, parallel generation systems such as solar
and battery storage.
Yet teaching guidance has not kept up to speed.
Assessment materials for the endorsements is absent.
Therefore, training organizations cannot
actually develop courses to deliver this capable workforce.
This creates a compliance catch 22 situation.
Workers need the endorsement to work legally
but cannot obtain the endorsement
because the pathway is not available
or requires prior work in the environment.
The second issue we have is that the notice is inconsistent
with the key statutory constraints
under section 87 B and C of the Electricity Act 1992.
The electrical Workers registration Board must not
unnecessarily restrict licensing
or impose undue cost on workers or the public.
In practice, the regime has created situations
where electricians now require multiple licenses
to do work historically covered by one license.
Each attracting fees included repeated application fees
and renewals every two years plus time away from paid work
for repeated courses.
The board has provided no clear pricing
or renewal transparency for multi licensed renewals
and course prerequisites.
This also creates unfair advantage
to the larger electrical firms from the sole trader,
the rural electrician whereby the sole trader has onerous
licensing costs and added to them is difficult to obtain.
The third issue we have with this is
that the con consultation was inadequate for a change
of this magnitude.
Section 88 requires consultation on the proposed
notice contents.
The earlier process in terms of consultation
captured only about 0.2% of the workforce
relied heavily on online survey mechanisms
and did not meaningfully engage representative
bodies like ourselves.
Critically what industry was shown
and could comment on an endorsement approach on a primary
license was not what was implemented.
The Gazette outcome delivered an expanded 41 class structure
where every new endorsement requires a separate
and additional license.
Targeted consultation in 2025 ran for only two weeks
and key industry feedback was not reflected.
The notice was released on the 1st of August, 2025
and took effect on the 4th of August, 2025,
three days later, leaving no realistic implementation time.
The fourth issue we have is that the notice calls
for explanation because it appears to leave routine safety
critical work or unauthorized, unclear
or unauthorized limits of work for electricians
and inspectors can find their prescribed electrical work
to work on installations, works,
or appliances, yet prescribed electrical work.
As defined in the electrical safety regulations includes a
specific and additional form of prescribed electrical work,
which is not work on an installation.
This is known as con connecting fittings to a power supply.
The practical consequences of failure
to authorize this is serious.
The electrical safety regulations 2010
prescribed the electrical safety procedures
for verifying the electrical safety
of this additional connection,
additional connection work which has been carried out
by representatives of the installation owner
or by a lines company without authorization from the
EWRB or the Electrical Workers Registration Board.
To make the connection to our power supply.
Electrical workers cannot lawfully verify the completed
installation is safe for consumers
to use in the manner in which the law requires
and that prevents consumers from safely
and lawfully using the installations they're paying for.
The scope of the board's powers is limited
to work defined in schedule one
of the electricity safety regulations 2010.
The government's risk management analysis has resulted in
only two locations being prescribed in the schedule
to enable the board's licensing, licensing intervention.
These areas are hazardous areas in commercial
and industrial locations and mines.
The board has created other licenses tied
to other locations.
The EWRB has Gazette notices that are ultra varies
to the scope of the prescribed electrical work and
therefore the board's delegated powers under
the electricity act.
When the EWRB was set up
and commenced in 1993, the board determined
that the competency it was created
to ensure was electrical safety competence.
The singular focus left technical competencies
and the skills required to handle the challenges posed
by different electrical applications to be achieved
through a qualification
or a credential path rather than by the licensing path.
The qualification
and credential path can better be determined
by industry, not the board.
Now Alexandra, I just want you
to know we are about halfway through the submission for
the two groups together.
Okay. But also we have members are keen to ask questions.
Okay. Do you wanna give us like a very quick summary? Sure.
Look, I mean I think we've outlined what we think are the,
the legal issues around that.
To be honest, the real world impacts on industry workforce
cap capacity and capability
and public safety are now tangible.
Our workforce capacity is being restrained just when
New Zealand needs electricians
and inspectors for the electrification surge that is here,
it's not coming, it's here.
Workers cannot lawfully upskill in pathways given the issue
that we've got around licensing.
So we are here today because we feel our electrical
compliance system is siloed, it's dysfunctional
and obstructive to the growth
of our national productivity agenda.
I'm happy to hand over to Warren to add his
Book. Welcome Warren. Thank
you.
And we do have three members
who are interested on Christians welcome.
Sure. Welcome. Thank you.
Um, the New Zealand Electrical Inspectors Association has
been battling WorkSafe energy safety
and the registrar of the EWB
for a few years over its implementation of poorly consulted
industry input and its risk
to public safety via secondary legislation changes.
We are frustrated with a number of shortcomings.
The Gazette notice published
by electrical registrar has very limited knowledge on
electricity and who has never read the notice
that he published an implementation
of 41 classes of license.
When we ask for endorsements as add-ons
with continuous professional development, I do the course
get endorsed as competent
and complete an online assessment every year to keep up
with the new rules and technology.
Not having competency guidelines and assessment material
before the regulatory changes come into effect for industry
to look at and critique
and the lack of proper industry consultation.
Gazette notices cherry picking groups whilst energy safety
consults in-house with one person
deciding the outcome is hardly democratic or professionally.
P peer reviewed. Uh, we used to have a ministry of energy
as a standalone government department that could be better,
that could better integrate the breadth
of controls required.
But this portfolio has been absorbed into enb
where the minister of energy is now subject
outside technical electrical policy from only one source.
There were good reasons for creating this former singular
entity and the restoration
of an over overarching government operation
to manage all things electrical
and gas with a was a worthy objective.
We see a number of solutions.
Firstly appoint an electrical commissioner
to oversee a new electrical system of regulation,
bring the energy safety back under MB at least
to give proper technical advice by a team of competent
and qualified electrical people.
Ideally return to a minister of energy would be better
appoint an electrical registrar who's from the electrical
industry and who is electrically competent.
Have the EWRB energy safety under one board, much the same
as plumbers do have the EWOB
as all competent electrical people with the lawyers
as advisors to the board.
Make the E-W-O-B-A technical point of focus again
where the electrician can ring up somebody
with electrically technical knowledge and get an answer.
Have the technical advisors to MB a team
or a board of electrically competent people from
around New Zealand from a wide
and varied industry led electrical background.
There should never be one person
and have endorsements as add-ons
to the person's current license
and kept as continuous professional development
as technology increases
to integrate into our modern societies.
So do our legislative and regulatory demands in a concise
and accurate information disseminated to the worker tasked
with interpreting law and safety.
Therefore, legislation must be fit for purpose, easy
to understand, and not one expensive.
Adding 41 classes of license doesn't the opposite of this
and NZA regards this as not listening to industry.
Thank you. Thank you Aaron. We have two minutes to go
so maybe the members if you can prioritize
and try to summarize your questions will be great.
We are interested in and Member Lawrence please.
Thank you. Cheer. Thank you so much for coming.
A quick question, Alexander, you mentioned in terms
of the impact that the new classes have and the complexity.
Great. Um, could you actually speak a bit more in terms of
what data do you have that suggests
that there is an impact in terms of time is taken for people
to get registration or, um, fewer applicate applicants.
And I'm particularly interested
'cause you mentioned the urban and rural aspects on whether
you are seeing a pattern emerging that impact
or affect rural areas more significantly.
Do you have any data on there?
Um, I'll hand over to Warren
because you work in the rural space, so you'll be able
to answer that a bit more clearly. I can tell when
I Yeah, yeah. We have, you
can you understand the rural electrician,
he might go to the gas station and do an inspection.
Um, he might wanna do some electrical work
on say a farmer's.
He might wanna go into this local, uh, place that has dust
and and and stuff like that.
So there's many different areas
that he may be need to be endorsed for.
So he's, he made four
or five different licenses that he has to go and try
and complete now to get that he needs to experience in that.
So he now needs to go outside of his region, try
and get some training in that.
So to get the endorsements, the catch 22,
you can't get the endorsement without having the training.
So instead he should do the course, be competent
and then have continuous professional development.
Great example of how to give an example. Joseph Moon.
Um, thank you. And, uh, thank you Alexandra and Warren.
Um, for your submissions, the, uh, both
of you oral submission and, and the risk,
what you've written to our committee.
Um, I I'm, I'm surprised to be frank to see that sub
what seems substantial change, change going from one license
covering everything to 41 licenses, um,
was done without any meaningful consultation.
Mm-hmm. And I think in the written material you said that,
um, there's individual contractors that were, um, uh,
spoken to, but your represented organizations weren't, uh,
I think covering 10,000 electoral contractors.
Yeah. And inspectors.
Um, can you just give us a little bit of, uh,
is is there any good reason for having 41 licenses
as opposed to one that would,
would make a substative difference?
And um, have you had an example before?
We haven't had this meaningful consultation
with the industry organizations when
making substantive changes.
I was quite shocked when I came in
and saw there was only 0.2% of consultation received
and a decision was made.
And actually when you look at the 0.2% most were not in
favor of what was being proposed.
Um, and I'll let the EWRB talk to that,
but that was the evidence
that we picked up from a licensing point of view,
the EWRB is there to maintain safety.
The competency is safety.
I don't know how 41 classes of license would give you
that assurance that they're there to prescribe safety.
I dunno if you've got anything to add
To that. I've got a page
here from the WRB uh, which says,
why are these changes being considered?
It's a 2021 document
and it says the board is proposing
to introduce four new endorsements.
So that's all we knew that was happening.
And all of a sudden we've got 41
different classes of license.
Um, certainly not what we thought was gonna happen.
And we were quite happy with having endorsements
as add-ons to license.
We regard commenting is important, um,
but we see this as extremely only same.
I'm sure the board is listening, uh, very closely
and preparing very succinct answers too.
But if we can have the last question from our answer, uh,
No, they've been, it's been covered.
Thanks. Yeah. Okay. We are a little bit over time,
but I thought that conversation was necessary
'cause we needed to not understand examples.
Um, if you would like to stay in the room, obviously
to listen to the write off reply, uh, from the board.
And I welcome, uh,
representatives from the board to come forward. Please.
Thank you for your time. Thank you. Thank you.
And please do introduce yourselves.
Thank you. My name's Russell Keys.
I'm the presiding member of the Electrical Workers
Registration Board.
Uh, just for a bit of context, I am an electrical inspector,
uh, and I hold an endorsement in mains generation.
Tom Wiseman, my deputy presiding member is also a registered
electrical inspector and works in the hazardous area
industry and holds a hazardous area endorsement, uh, to, uh,
truck Tran is a lay member of the board
and supports the board from a lay member perspective.
Truck also has a legal background.
I'd just also like to add that I have, uh, the rest
of my board behind me, uh, also the registrar.
And I also have my last board member attending via Zoom.
So we have full board attending today. Wow.
If it pleases a committee, I'll have a brief opening,
I'd like to present and then we'll provide some time
for questions for you.
So the EWRB is responsible for the registration
and licensing of New Zealand's
33,000 plus electrical workers.
These electrical workers operate across a wide range
of environments from households
and to those that are highly significant and
or dangerous in feeding hospitals, infrastructure, projects,
mining, and so on, and doing so, they deal with a wide
and ever evolving range of technology.
The board's function and powers are set out in the
electricity Act 1992.
We act in accordance with the following principles,
the health and safety of the public,
promoting the competency of electrical workers,
especially in the high risk areas,
and ensuring a workable approach to registration
and regulation in the midst
of emerging technologies such as solar systems.
The board operates on a part-time basis
and is primarily made up of people
who are actively involved as electrical workers.
The electrical prescribed classes
of registration for electrical workers.
Notice 2025 sets out the classes of registration
for electrical workers and the minimum standards
of those different classes.
It came into effect on the 4th of August, 2025
and was part of a wider process.
The classes were first implemented through a notice in 2023.
They had a staggered commencement from 2024 to 2026 in order
to allow for a smoother transition for electoral workers.
The 2025 notice fit into this process by addressing concerns
that have been received from industry participants,
including the bodies that have brought the current complaint
and developing and implementing the notices.
The board complied with the legislative requirements,
including obtaining ministerial approval.
It also carried out significant consult consultation
for the 2023 notice.
We ran a six week consultation
and received 85 submissions for the 2025 notice.
We undertook a targeted consultation due
to the technical nature of the amendments.
Key stakeholders who were engaged were broadly
supportive of the proposals.
We went to 12 stakeholders and received five responses.
Just like to address, uh, some of the complaint here.
The board has the power to create classes, not endorsements.
So the legislative settings do not provide for a class
of registration to carry endorsements.
The range of classes are intended
to achieve the same pur purpose within
the legislative framework.
The classes created by the board aligned with the purpose
of the ACT for the relevant guiding
principles in creating them.
The board also considered the wider regulatory scheme,
including safety regulations created by the governor.
General trainees
and supervisors can undertake some work ahead
of registration.
The ACT allows workers to gain required experience under
supervision section 76 of the act.
And as trainees through limited certificates, section 77
of the ACT, broad criteria for registration allow competency
to be demonstrated through various forms
of training and experience.
The board also has the power
to grant exemptions on a case by case basis.
We are working on ways to streamline how
to identify applicants who may qualify.
There are no undue costs for registration.
Electrical workers pay a registration fee once practicing
license fees are flat fees regardless
of the number of classes you hold.
The board may also grant exemptions under section 1 0 7
of the act in the appropriate cases
to support existing electrical workers.
To transition into the new registration framework,
we ran a grandparent, we ran a grandparenting process so
that electrical workers could apply
for the new endorsed classes at no cost
and continue to work in the endorsed areas without
interruption to their business.
Over 8,000 applications
for endorsed registration classes
were approved through this process.
Costs associated
with limited certificates are not relevant to this complaint.
These are set out in separate safety regulations made
by the government general.
In summary, the board feels confident
that the 2025 notice is an important step in protecting the
health and safety of the public promoting competency across
electrical workers, and is a workable approach
to the registration and regulation connected to this.
The board is confident that the notice aligns
with the requirements of the ACT
and that it was created using a proper process
with meaningful consultation.
The board is committed to continued dialogue
with key stakeholders and those across in industry,
including the complainants.
It will consider the feedback at receives as part
of our statutory five-year review. Thank you.
Thank you. Um,
Lawrence, Nan, Dr. Lawrence.
Nan. Thank you Chair. Thank you.
Um, I guess the first thing is,
if you wouldn't mind addressing the submitters, I would,
submitters mentioned before in terms
of the catch 22 scenario with endorsement
where you could apply for it,
but it's particularly for rural electricians
where they're supposed to get the training
required for that.
So with, to apply for an endorsement, generally you have
to be able to prove, prove competency in that class
of endorse work you'd like to undertake.
Yeah, and that is one of the reasons
that we introduce the endorsed classes of licensing is
to promote the health and safety of the public
of New Zealand, which is one of our primary concerns.
So with the advent of modern technology
and the newer pro, um, pieces of work that are out there
and with the higher risk work, we are wanting people
to prove competency
and that they are competent to do the work instead
of just doing a course and then obtaining a license.
And I guess the question I have is practically yes.
How are they supposed to be doing that in, I mean,
I understand the health and safety component, but if
What for training and working within that
and part of the industry,
But if there's no one in those communities
and the travel with that at a loss of their business,
if they are sole trader for example, how would
that work? Visibly?
It's towards me. All right.
So I guess it aligns widely
with the way electricians are trained anyway.
At the moment. You carry out some parts
of your training on job,
which you can do in your workplace under supervision.
Um, but primarily you have to go to a polytech
or another place to carry a block courses.
So that what we're implementing essentially follows the same
process where you need to go and do a body of learning
and then you need to provide some level of evidence
that you have been supervised in the area so
that we have a sense of competence.
Um, I guess the answer is it's, it's no different
to gaining your traditional electrical class of license.
And Joseph Ney. Uh, my question
probably only comes as a surprise.
It's basically a, a, a reiteration of the question I asked
before, but, um, there, there's a lot
of complexity in this that we haven't gone to.
Uh, and these, you know, allegations of standards out
of date, the complexity of the,
of the class scheme raf different issues which you would've
thought you'd be able to work through if there had been
consultation with the, the industry bodies.
Um, and I'm sure
that New Zealand Electrical Stickers Association
and the master electricians also have safety
as a core concern.
Uh, so my two questions is, is why
did you think was necessary to move from one to 41 licenses?
Which seems a pretty significant difference.
Um, and why didn't you think it was, it was necessary
to consult with the two primary industry bodies, um, and,
and coming up with the scheme.
Okay, thank you. So to moving from one license class,
as I earlier said, there's emerging technologies
that are coming to new well here in New Zealand now,
and they prevent a lot more risk than
traditional electrical work.
And I'll, I'll work on solar systems
and PV electrical mains parallel generation.
Um, there is a higher risk in doing that work
and with the board has deemed that
as high risk electrical work.
So it needs to be done by people
that are competent to do that.
There are other areas, um, that come in as well,
hazardous areas where Tom works.
There's the medical cardiac area where people, you know,
you're attaching probes
of electrical equipment to people's bodies.
Uh, so it's a, there is a, if it's done poorly,
there is a risk of people getting hurt or dying from it.
Um, endorsements initially started from the outcome
of the Pike River disaster in the mining area when there
was, um, obviously a significant loss.
And there was, that's when our first endorsements came into
place after that disaster to make sure
that the people working within that part
of the industry were highly skilled
and specifically knew what they were doing
for the mining area, which is totally different from
a domestic electrician. Um,
Sorry, just for the consultation, um, the two, um,
complainants who are here today, they were consulted in the,
the first, um, consultation process
and then in the targeted consultation process they
were involved in that as well.
And we received submissions from
both of 'em on both instances. Yeah.
Uh, and I guess practically as well.
So the, the reason why there are, uh, 41 right license
registration classes now is there wasn't a provision
to bring in endorsements.
There was no such thing as an endorsement to bring in.
So the, the fix was to,
I guess reframe it into licensing classes.
And that was the secondary, um, consultation piece was
to make this technical change from going to something
that we couldn't practically do to go to something
that we did have the ability to implement
the practically as well.
And, and the way this applies, so using an electrician
as an example, they would have their electrician class
of license as their base class of license.
Then they have the ability to upskill in any
of the areas in medical cardiac or means parallel
or hazardous areas of mining.
And then they can add on that class
of license to their base class.
So could I, could I, sorry, when I'm just looking at time,
could I just ask a supplementary question?
'cause 'cause they said they weren't meaningly consulted.
I know they were 12 consulted in the last round.
What do you class as? Consultation.
So we consult, we send out the information that we have
that we, the questions that we're asking
to the participants.
Um, and we didn't personally go
and sit with them for consultation.
Uh, that that's not something
that the board has the ability or time to do.
So we expect written consultation
provided back from them. So,
So was an organization with 10,000 members, was
that treated the same as the other 11 Some,
um, yes. People consultant,
They were industry stakeholders that we deemed important.
I feel like there, there are lots of what desire
to respond to from some people
with the gentleman sitting behind you.
Um, was that a supplementary or
It's supplementary as well. Yeah.
Is that kind of a two supplementary. Okay.
We'll be very quick. Um, yeah,
Most Of the changes happening in 2023.
Right. In terms of the mo the change of classes
and et cetera from a few 2 41, that was 2023 notice.
Can I just check that? When you did consult,
how were the feedback
that you received meaningfully incorporated
or changed as part of the 2023 notice?
I mean, part of the thing is if you're consulting
with industry peak bodies
and they're like, this is a really bad idea.
You're like, well, that, this is just a,
to put it bluntly is a box sitting exercise, you know,
So there were, there were parts of the consultation
that received that feedback from the consultation received
that we did include into the revised notices that went out.
Uh, I I sorry, Tom's looking for one at the moment
that we can give you as an example.
Um, I didn't out, so yeah, we didn't just consult
and then pop it in the bin
and say, yes, we've ticked that box.
We did take, um, notice I'll, I'll add that the feedback
that we did receive was generally, um, positive.
Obviously there's always going to be some negative
and we do take that into consideration.
Do you wanna speak to that? Uh, I just said the three, uh,
so can I just quickly read this out?
Yeah. So, um, the 2025 notice addressed concerns about the
2023 notice raised by industry
by bringing forward the commencement
of the new endorsed classes so electrical workers could
benefit from them sooner.
Tightening the associated trade person registration class
work limits to reduce the risk of harm
and removing the authorization to supervise other people
changing testing and certification requirements to align
with the work of an electrical worker
that electrical worker is authorized to do.
Okay. Another quick set from an issue. Workers,
Uh, yeah, I think, um, was it, Tom, you mentioned the, uh,
fact that there was no system to allow endorsements
to be the way in which you'd address the issue,
which is why the decision was made, made to move
to different classes of a number of different classes.
License just feels to me, looking at the bigger picture, if
is there a problem with the legislation?
Like is the better methodology and an endorsement model
because it, I'm getting smiles from both sides,
Just, sorry. We'll
be providing, um,
succinct feedback in our section 1 5 8 review
to the minister this year around those things that we do.
There are lots of, um, I'm gonna be very blunt.
The, the act is old. It's 1992.
It is outdated. It needs an overhaul.
Yeah. Okay. Okay.
And and last question coming from member,
uh, miles Anderson, please.
Yeah, thanks Chair.
So I can understand around the mining stuff,
but what problem were you solving with the rest of the
licensing as far as what issues had arisen to give you,
um, the push
to change the licensing regime?
Okay. Um, so we don't like to be reactive.
We like to be proactive.
We like to try and, um, head off anything that happens.
I'm just gonna concentrate again on, um, solar pv.
It's a new, it's a, it's a newest, um,
energy form that's coming out.
Um, it's high risk,
it's dangerous if you're working on a roof installing solar
panels and you get it wrong
unless it's nighttime, the energy source doesn't stop.
So there's significant risk if you don't know what it is.
The board already has seen
and sees probably five to 10 complaints per year
around solar PV installation.
So we took that as a bit of a guide
that there's probably something we needed to do proactively
to, um, address the increase of the work coming forward
and to make sure it was done safely
to ensure the safety of the New Zealand public.
Thank you. Um, we are over time
and I have extended it a little bit, um,
and I have so many burning questions to ask too,
but, um, thank you so much everyone for coming in.
I do think that there are some nods and some shaking heads
and you wanted to reply to something.
Um, but we'll, we'll have to move into private session
so we can have a discussion than what,
how we are gonna move forward from here.
Um, and it sounds like there is a much
bigger question to be answered to.
So thank you very much for making a trip in.
Thank you for your time. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.